Merge `Introduction to the Lisk SDK` into the `Understand Blockchain` page, update based on v6. - Closes 1628 (#1635)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/understand-blockchain/index.adoc

:url_understand_interoperability: understand-blockchain/interoperability/index.adoc
:url_relayer: understand-blockchain/interoperability/index.adoc#sidechain-to-mainchain

//External URLs
:url_github_lns_dashboard: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-examples/tree/nh-lisk-name-service/tutorials/lisk-name-service/lns-dashboard-plugin
:url_github_srs: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-examples/tree/development/tutorials/social-recovery
:url_blog_benchmark: https://lisk.com/blog/development/benchmarking-lisk-core-v3.0.0-against-lisk-core-v2.1.6-0
:url_lisk_apps: https://lisk.com/ecosystem

In the "Understand Lisk blockchain" category you learn the basic concepts of Lisk blockchain, Lisk Network, and Lisk blockchain applications. The page discusses the topics and terms that are important to know when developing within the Lisk ecosystem.

== What is the Lisk Blockchain?

A blockchain footnote:blockchain_footnote[For a general introduction into blockchain, please check out the introduction page xref:{url_what_is_blockchain}[What is blockchain].] is a chain of interconnected blocks on various nodes distributed across a P2P network.

> Each node keeps its copy of the blockchain protocol and its related data.

Author: Would this work for you?

```suggestion
Each node runs an instance of the blockchain client and also stores node-specific on-chain and off-chain data.
```

The different blockchain applications communicate with each other via relayer nodes by following the xref:{url_understand_interoperability}[] protocol.

A typical network of chains and their nodes is illustrated in the diagram below:

.Lisk network for chains and their nodes
image::intro/node-network.png[Side chain's node network, 800 ,align="center"]

.Shared on-chain logic, optional off-chain logic
****
All nodes belonging to the same blockchain application need to share the same on-chain logic as described in <<Modules>>.
On the contrary, the off-chain logic as discussed in <<Plugins>> can differ from node to node.
****

// ==== Communication between chains
// Lisk supports cross-chain communication and allows sidechains to communicate with each other via *relayers*.
// A relayer is a blockchain node that collects cross-chain messages and relays them across chains.
// It does so by invoking the RPC endpoints available for cross-chain communication. 

=== The Architecture of blockchain applications

As mentioned earlier, a blockchain application consists of a network of nodes connected via P2P.

> *Each node has an instance of Lisk Protocol and together, these nodes form a chain*. The on-chain logic present in each instance of the Lisk blockchain application must be the same for a chain. However, the off-chain logic for each node can differ within a chain.

Reviewer: instance of Lisk Protocol?

> The on-chain logic present in each instance of the Lisk blockchain application must be the same for a chain.

this should be either
`instance of the Lisk blockchain client` or `Lisk blockchain node`.

Each node inside the network can deploy various kinds of plugins to support their off-chain logic.

For example, consider a case whereby a node wants to investigate any possible misbehavior in the Lisk network. To achieve this, the node operator must acquire all the blocks' data from the network, save it, and then analyze it to determine if any misbehavior had occurred.

A node manager can write a script to perform the aforementioned task. However, Lisk provides the xref:{url_references_report_misbbehavior_plugin}[Report Misbehavior Plugin] which listens to blocks' data and reports a node with regard to a generator's misbehavior.

To add a new plugin to your application, either reuse an existing plugin from another blockchain application or create a new plugin based on the specific requirements of your application.

TIP: Lisk provides a set of plugins that can be injected into the Application layer when needed. For more information, see xref:{url_sdk_plugins}[Plugins].

====== When to create a plugin

Plugins are able to perform the following:

* Search the blockchain data.
* Aggregate the blockchain data.

> * Provide a UI for the blockchain application.

Reviewer: this should be removed

* Automate the blockchain logic, such as automatically sending transactions.

> * Add a proxy to the application interfaces.

Reviewer: what do you mean by this?

Author: Not sure, it's existing text. @Tschakki can you please elaborate on this?

Reviewer 2: Not sure 100% as this is very old text, but i think in v5 you could add new actions / endpoints in a plugin, so you could provide additional RPC endpoints, and also create own APIs via plugin, like the HTTP plugin we had, maybe it is referring to that.

Author: I have removed this line since we are unsure of it.

===== Configuration
The Lisk solution is both convenient and flexible in terms of how to operate a node, coupled with how to execute both on-chain and off-chain logic. 

> To serve this purpose, the blockchain application accepts a configuration that is part of the state machine.

Reviewer: i don't really understand this. maybe we can rephrase. Also, configuration is not part of the state machine?

Author: Ummmmm not sure what you mean. A configuration is part of the state machine as described in the text and the diagram. Can you please suggest more information about what change you might be looking for?

A set of default configurations are passed to a blockchain application.
These configurations can be individually tweaked as necessary.
For off-chain components and logic, e.g. Plugins, etc., the configurations can differ for each node.

> However, the Genesis configuration and the configuration for the on-chain logic such as Modules must be the same across the network of a blockchain application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the Genesis configuration and the configuration for Modules must be the same across the network of a blockchain application.
```

TIP: For more information about the available configurations, see xref:{url_advanced_architecture_config}[].

> ==== Engine layer

Reviewer: i don't think we need to explain engine layer in this level. Since the engine can be treated as a blackbox for developer, it can be in more nested place

Author: What would you like the engine layer to state? Please suggest changes in terms of text and also in the architecture.png diagram 🥲

Reviewer: For the beginning of the page, I think we can mention the engine layer, but without mentioning exact component of the engine.
We could say engine is responsible for network and consensus, and additionally it maintains transaction pool, RPC server and block generator. (I would specifically not mention `chain` because it's too low level)

I would refrain from writing the detail too much at this level, because if we change the internal working it will break the documentation although it is not breaking change.

Reviewer 2: Imho we don't add too much detail here, we just describe the purpose of each engine component briefly enough to understand its' purpose for the reader. I think it is important information to get the whole picture, and additionally, it complements our previous section of the 3 domains of blockchain, because 2 of that domains are actually inside the engine layer (p2p network & consensus).

Maybe what could be improved is to give more context to the reader, what exactly they can customize. Emphasize in the intro text of the engine layer, that this layer is not customizable by the developer (except they create their own engine, which is a very complex task).
And to complement it, we can also add a Note to the Application layer, that this part is completely customizable by the sidechain developer.

Author: Thanks for the feedback. I have pruned the text further and removed low-level details from the engine layer to make it more flexible. I have removed variable names, config properties, details related to the chain, etc. I have realigned the content to give an overview of the engine layer without going into too much detail. The diagram has also been updated.

The Lisk blockchain provides three industry-standard communication protocols: Inter-Process Communication (IPC), Web Sockets (WS), and Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP).
The communication protocol of the blockchain application can be changed through xref:{url_advanced_architecture_config}[configurations].

It is possible to communicate to modules and plugins directly by invoking xref:{url_advanced_communication_endpoints}[endpoints] via an RPC request, or by subscribing to xref:{url_advanced_communication_events}[events].

It is recommended to use the IPC/WebSocket protocols where possible, as they provide more enhanced performance regarding the response times, (see the blog post: {url_blog_benchmark}[Benchmarking Lisk Core v3.0.0 against Lisk Core v2.1.6]).

For more information about the communication architecture, see xref:{url_advanced_communication}[Communicating to a Lisk node via RPC].

=== Frontend & UI integration
.Different blockchain application structures
image::intro/ui-diagrams.png[different-structures-of-blockchain-application,700 ,align="center"]

Blockchain applications usually consist of a frontend and a backend, just like normal web applications.

> In contrast to normal server-client applications, there is not one central backend, but rather a whole network of nodes that together secure and maintain the status of the blockchain.

Reviewer: I think we should separate the network and server-client explanation here. (ie: we should not call blockchain node as `backend`

Author: This page will be updated again, once the terminologies are finalized across all teams.

Each node can handle complex business logic and provides a flexible and customizable API.
The blockchain itself is used as a database layer for the application.

The frontend allows users to interact with the blockchain application.
The implementation of a frontend is flexible.
For example, this can be achieved in the following ways:

TIP: Although it is possible to build a UI through plugins, It is recommended to separate the UI from the backend of the application to increase scalability.

[loweralpha]

> . Plugins can be used to develop a UI for a blockchain application, in the case of a very simple and small UI. 

Reviewer: i think we shouldn't mention this in the first place since we don't recommened

Reviewer: yes, we do but those are specifically for development, and not intended for developer to build UI with the plugin

Please be aware, every node has only a few basic API endpoints as described in the xref:{url_rpc_endpoints}[RPC API for the Lisk nodes] page, which might not be ideally suited for more complex UIs. 
In this case, we recommend using the enriched API of Lisk Service as middleware to communicate between the frontend and blockchain application.  

.. One example is the frontend of the {url_github_srs}[SRS example application^], which has been developed with React.js. 
Another example is the UI for the Hello World application, detailed in the guide xref:{url_integrate_ui}[].  

. **[recommended]** For later requirements in a production environment, we highly recommend using xref:{url_lisk_service_intro}[Lisk Service], which will aggregate the data from the blockchain network and other 3rd party sources and will provide an enriched API with a lot more endpoints and query options for the UI.
With Lisk Service, you can also create a custom service as per your business requirements to support various UI projects, such as mobile and web applications. 
The frontend can then request this data via API requests from Lisk Service.

> // TODO: this will be revised after terminology discussion.

Reviewer: 👍

= Understand Lisk blockchain
Muhammad Talha <muhammad.talha@lightcurve.io>
//Settings
:toc: preamble
:toclevels: 5
:page-toclevels: 3
:idprefix:
:idseparator: -

// URLs
:url_lip55: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0055.md
:url_protocol: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips#proposals

// Project URLs
:url_what_is_blockchain: intro/what-is-blockchain.adoc
:url_intro_consensus: intro/how-blockchain-works.adoc#consensus-mechanisms
:url_understand_state_machine: understand-blockchain/state-machine.adoc
:url_understand_consensus: understand-blockchain/consensus/index.adoc
:url_understand_network: understand-blockchain/lisk-protocol/network.adoc
:url_understand_state_machine_tree: understand-blockchain/state-machine.adoc#the-blockchain-state-as-sparse-merkle-tree
:url_understand_sdk_modules: understand-blockchain/sdk/modules-assets.adoc
:lisk_service: lisk-service::
:docs_sdk: lisk-sdk::
:lisk_cross_chain_communication: understand-blockchain/interoperability/communication.adoc
:url_lisk_default_modules: {docs_sdk}modules/index.adoc
:url_lisk_service_intro: {lisk_service}index.adoc

> :url_consensus: understand-blockchain/consensus.adoc

Reviewer 2: this url is wrong. The url in line 18 is the correct one

*Each node has an instance of Lisk Protocol and together, these nodes form a chain*. The on-chain logic present in each instance of the Lisk blockchain application must be the same for a chain. However, the off-chain logic for each node can differ within a chain.

Each blockchain application has its own separate blockchain which is known as a sidechain. This sidechain is registered with the mainchain.

The architecture of a blockchain application is divided into the following two layers:

* Application layer
* Engine layer

A detailed illustration of the blockchain application's architecture can be seen in the following diagram below.

.A detailed illustration of the Lisk Blockchain Application
image::architecture.png[lisk-framework-architecture, 700 , align="center"]

==== Application layer
The application layer handles state changes to the blockchain.
The function of the application layer is to act as an interface to connect to the outside world, such as various external services in order to send and receive data.
An application layer consists of a <<State machine>>, <<Modules>>, <<Plugins>>, and <<Configuration>>.

===== State machine

> As the name suggests, a state machine is relevant to the states of a machine. A blockchain application relies heavily on its state machine to mutate the state of a blockchain. 

Reviewer 2: Please add a link to the state machine page here

* *Transitions*: A transition is defined as the instantaneous transfer from one state to another state. For example, using our padlock analogy, to change from the state "Unlocked" to "Locked", a transition would be "Close padlock", and then from "Locked" to "Unlocked", it would be "Insert key & turn".

The application layer changes states by using modules, which define the on-chain logic for the blockchain application.

===== Modules

Modules aid the state machine to transition the state of the blockchain with verified and validated data.
They contain on-chain logic which is part of the blockchain protocol.

For example, if Bob wants to send 10 LSK tokens to Alice then, behind the scenes a module will verify the validity of such a request.
Upon validation and verification, the module will ask the state machine to transfer 10 LSK tokens from Bob's account to Alice's account.

TIP: Lisk provides a range of modules out of the box, for more information see xref:{url_lisk_default_modules}[].

====== When to create a module

> xref:{url_introduction_modules}[Modules] are able to perform the following functions:

Reviewer 2: Please remove the link here and add it to line 183, when `Modules` is first mentioned

===== Plugins

Plugins represent the off-chain logic.
A plugin is not part of the application layer and must be registered with the blockchain application before its use.
Each node inside the network can deploy various kinds of plugins to support their off-chain logic.

For example, consider a case whereby a node wants to investigate any possible misbehavior in the Lisk network. To achieve this, the node operator must acquire all the blocks' data from the network, save it, and then analyze it to determine if any misbehavior had occurred.

A node manager can write a script to perform the aforementioned task. However, Lisk provides the xref:{url_references_report_misbbehavior_plugin}[Report Misbehavior Plugin] which listens to blocks' data and reports a node with regard to a generator's misbehavior.

To add a new plugin to your application, either reuse an existing plugin from another blockchain application or create a new plugin based on the specific requirements of your application.

TIP: Lisk provides a set of plugins that can be injected into the Application layer when needed. For more information, see xref:{url_sdk_plugins}[Plugins].

====== When to create a plugin

> xref:{url_introduction_plugins}[] are able to perform the following:

Reviewer 2: Same here, please move link to Plugins page to line 201

* Search the blockchain data.
* Aggregate the blockchain data.
* Provide a UI for the blockchain application.
* Automate the blockchain logic, such as automatically sending transactions.
* Add a proxy to the application interfaces.

===== Configuration
The Lisk solution is both convenient and flexible in terms of how to operate a node, coupled with how to execute both on-chain and off-chain logic. 
To serve this purpose, the blockchain application accepts a configuration that is part of the state machine.

A set of default configurations are passed to a blockchain application.
These configurations can be individually tweaked as necessary.
For off-chain components and logic, e.g. Plugins, etc., the configurations can differ for each node.

> However, the configurations for on-chain logic, e.g. Modules, etc., must be the same across the network of a blockchain application.

Reviewer 2: I think only modules and genesis config should not be different between nodes. Maybe we can be more precise here.

Please be aware, every node has only a few basic API endpoints as described in the xref:{url_rpc_endpoints}[RPC API for the Lisk nodes] page, which might not be ideally suited for more complex UIs. 
In this case, we recommend using the enriched API of Lisk Service as middleware to communicate between the frontend and blockchain application.  

.. One example is the frontend of the {url_github_srs}[SRS example application^], which has been developed with React.js. 
Another example is the UI for the Hello World application, detailed in the guide xref:{url_integrate_ui}[].  

. **[recommended]** For later requirements in a production environment, we highly recommend using xref:{url_lisk_service_intro}[Lisk Service], which will aggregate the data from the blockchain network and other 3rd party sources and will provide an enriched API with a lot more endpoints and query options for the UI.
With Lisk Service, you can also create a custom service as per your business requirements to support various UI projects, such as mobile and web applications. 
The frontend can then request this data via API requests from Lisk Service.

> === Blockchain applications vs. dApps

Reviewer 2: After our terminology discussion, this whole section will need to be updated. (also, a lot of content in the docs and on this page in general ^^)
I would suggest that we comment it out and update it once the discussion is completed.

If the flexible characteristics of smart contracts are desired inside a blockchain application, it is of course also possible to develop a blockchain application that supports smart contracts.
For example, a new module could be added to the application, which accepts smart contracts.
This way it is possible to have the best of both worlds combined.

Additionally, smart contracts can reuse an already existing blockchain, which saves time when launching the application, as it is not necessary to take care of setting up an independent blockchain network, and finding generators footnote:delegate_footnote[For more information about generators, check the xref:{url_protocol_consensus}[Consensus algorithm] page of the Lisk protocol.], etc.

Blockchain applications on the contrary rely on their blockchain, and therefore also need to take care of maintaining their network.
In the beginning, this will make the launch of the application slightly more complex, however, having an independent network comes with numerous benefits which are covered in the following paragraphs.

> The Lisk documentation refers to applications built with the Lisk protocol as "blockchain applications" and not "dApps". To clarify the difference, blockchain applications do not share a common blockchain, but instead, each runs on its chain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Lisk documentation refers to applications built with the Lisk protocol as "blockchain applications" and not "dApps". To clarify the difference, blockchain applications do not share a common blockchain, but instead, each runs on its own chain.
```

Additionally, check out the apps list at the {url_lisk_apps}[Blockchain applications powered by Lisk^] page.
****

==== Structure of blockchain applications
.Different blockchain application structures
image::intro/ui-diagrams.png[different-structures-of-blockchain-application,700 ,align="center"]

Blockchain applications usually consist of a frontend and a backend, just like normal web applications.

In contrast to normal server-client applications, there is not one central backend, but rather a whole network of nodes that together secure and maintain the status of the blockchain.
Each node can handle complex business logic and provides a flexible and customizable API.
The blockchain itself is used as a database layer for the application.

The frontend allows users to interact with the blockchain application.
The implementation of a frontend is flexible.
For example, this can be achieved in the following ways:

TIP: Although it is possible to build a UI through plugins, It is recommended to separate the UI from the backend of the application to increase scalability.

[loweralpha]

> . Plugins can be used to develop a UI for a blockchain application. You can create and register a UI xref:{url_introduction_plugins}[plugin] for your blockchain application.

Reviewer 2: . Plugins can be used to develop a UI for a blockchain application, in case of a very simple and small UI.
You can create and register a UI xref:{url_introduction_plugins}[plugin] for your blockchain application.
It is *not* recommended to develop complex production-ready UIs in plugins.

> . Plugins can be used to develop a UI for a blockchain application. You can create and register a UI xref:{url_introduction_plugins}[plugin] for your blockchain application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Plugins can be used to develop a UI for a blockchain application, in case of a very simple and small UI.
You can create and register a UI xref:{url_introduction_plugins}[plugin] for your blockchain application.
It is *not* recommended to develop complex production-ready UIs in plugins.
```

An example implementation of a *frontend as a plugin* is the {url_github_lns_dashboard}[LNS UI plugin] for the example application Lisk Name Service.

> . Use your favorite framework/ programming language to develop a *standalone user interface*, and communicate to the node via the available <<communication-interfaces-apis>>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Use your favorite framework/ programming language to develop a *standalone user interface*, and communicate to the node via the available <<communication-interfaces-apis>>.
Please be aware, every node has only a few basic API endpoints(here link to RPC endpoints page), which might not be ideally suited for more complex UIs. 
In this case, we recommend to use the enriched API of Lisk Service as middleware to communicate between frontend and blockchain application.
```

One example is the frontend of the {url_github_srs}[SRS example application^], which has been developed with React.js.
Another example is the UI for the Hello World application, detailed in the guide xref:{url_integrate_ui}[].

> . For later requirements in a production environment, a *middleware* similar to xref:{url_lisk_service_intro}[Lisk Service] should be used, which will aggregate the data from the blockchain network and other 3rd party sources as well.
> With middleware, you can also create a custom service as per your business needs to support various UI projects like mobile and web applications.
> The frontend can then request this data via API requests from the middleware.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. For later requirements in a production environment, we highly recommend to use xref:{url_lisk_service_intro}[Lisk Service], which will aggregate the data from the blockchain network and other 3rd party sources, and will provide an enriched API with a lot of more endpoints and  query options.
With Lisk Service, you can also create a custom services as per your business needs to support various UI projects like mobile and web applications.
The frontend can then request this data via API requests from Lisk Service.
```

. xref:{url_understand_network}[*Network domain*]: Responsible for the communication of the peer-to-peer network.

The three domains are the pillars of the Lisk blockchain and are the only core part of the <<Lisk Protocol>>. 
Their functionality is defined by Lisk and can only be configured if needed.
Anything else discussed ahead, can be developed differently as long as they comply with the Lisk protocol rules.
It is recommended to use Lisk's implementation of the protocol to avoid erroneous behavior.

=== Lisk Network
A Lisk network consists of various chains and each chain is a set of interconnected nodes. 
If this chain belongs to a specific blockchain application, it is called a sidechain otherwise there is a mainchain with which each sidechain registers.

Each chain such as a sidechain or mainchain consists of a network of servers, which are also called *nodes* in this context.

A typical network of chains and their nodes is illustrated in the diagram below:

.Lisk network for chains and their nodes
image::intro/node-network.png[Side chain's node network, 800 ,align="center"]

.Shared on-chain logic, optional off-chain logic
****

> All nodes in the network need to share the same on-chain logic as described in <<Modules>>. On the contrary, the off-chain logic as discussed in <<Plugins>> can differ from node to node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All nodes belonging to the same blockchain application need to share the same on-chain logic as described in <<Modules>>.
On the contrary, the off-chain logic as discussed in <<Plugins>> can differ from node to node.
```

Reviewer 2: if we picture now a multi-blockchain network, we need to adjust this sentence.

****

==== P2P: Unstructured partial mesh network
The P2P network of nodes is unstructured, which means that all nodes are equal participants in the network.
It is also a partial mesh network, therefore every node is only connected to a small subset of nodes in the network.

Unstructured partial mesh networks allow nodes to share information in a very expeditious and secure manner with all other nodes.

> In addition, they also have the ability to scale extremely well, even for large networks with thousands of connected nodes.

Reviewer 2: This is only true for nodes belonging to the bapp. Maybe we can remove this section from here and add it to #1489

==== Communication between chains
Lisk supports cross-chain communication and allows sidechains to communicate with each other via *relayers*.
A relayer is a blockchain node that collects cross-chain messages and relays them across chains.

> It does so by invoking the RPC endpoints available for cross-chain communication. 

Reviewer 2: This would need to be improved, but for now I think we can just remove this paragraph, as we can refer to the interoperability explanation pages above.

> === Lisk Protocol

Reviewer 2: We use the term "Lisk protocol" to describe the collection of LIPs, so this title here is not fitting. In this section, we talk about the bapp architecture, so the title should reflect that.

```suggestion
=== Architecture of blockchain applications
```

As mentioned earlier, a blockchain application consists of a network of nodes connected via P2P.
*Each node has an instance of Lisk Protocol and together, these nodes form a chain*. The on-chain logic present in each instance of the Lisk protocol must be the same for a chain. However, the off-chain logic for each node can differ within a chain.

Each blockchain application has its own separate blockchain which is known as a sidechain. This sidechain is registered with the main chain.

> A node can only connect to a single network, this can either be the mainchain or a sidechain.

Reviewer 2: Would remove, not relevant here

> The Lisk Protocol is divided into the following two layers:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The architecture of a blockchain application is divided into the following two layers:
```

Reviewer 2: please update this on the other locations as well

It is recommended to use the IPC/WebSocket protocols where possible, as they provide more enhanced performance regarding the response times, (see the blog post: {url_blog_benchmark}[Benchmarking Lisk Core v3.0.0 against Lisk Core v2.1.6]).

For more information about the communication architecture, see xref:{url_advanced_communication}[Communicating to a Lisk node via RPC].

=== What are blockchain applications?

A blockchain application is any kind of application that uses its own blockchain as a database layer.

More specifically, within the Lisk documentation, whenever blockchain applications are discussed, this is directly referring to applications running on blockchains that are compatible with the <<lisk-protocol>>.

Blockchain applications are highly customizable as the Lisk protocol allows, creating a scalable UI and business logic on top of the Lisk Service. 

.Examples of blockchain applications
****
Examples of blockchain applications can be found in the tutorials, such as the xref:{url_tutorials_nft}[], or the xref:{url_tutorials_srs}[] application.

Additionally, check out the apps list at the {url_lisk_apps}[Blockchain applications powered by Lisk^] page.

> ****

Reviewer 2: This section is breaking the flow quite heavily - we are talking about bapps all the time on this page, and the last chapter is finally explaining what it is xD

I would move this part defining/explaining bapps to the respective section at line 78 and following at the beginning

Reviewer 3: Agreed. 👍

> ==== Structure of blockchain applications

Reviewer 2: Section title should be updated to be more fitting.
Something like:

```suggestion
=== Frontend & UI integration
```

Please be aware, every node has only a few basic API endpoints as described in the xref:{url_rpc_endpoints}[] page, which might not be ideally suited for more complex UIs. 
In this case, we recommend using the enriched API of Lisk Service as middleware to communicate between the frontend and blockchain application.  

.. One example is the frontend of the {url_github_srs}[SRS example application^], which has been developed with React.js. 
Another example is the UI for the Hello World application, detailed in the guide xref:{url_integrate_ui}[].  

. For later requirements in a production environment, we highly recommend using xref:{url_lisk_service_intro}[Lisk Service], which will aggregate the data from the blockchain network and other 3rd party sources, and will provide an enriched API with a lot more endpoints and query options. 
With Lisk Service, you can also create a custom service as per your business needs to support various UI projects like mobile and web applications. 
The frontend can then request this data via API requests from Lisk Service.

> ==== Blockchain applications vs. dApps

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Blockchain applications vs. dApps
```

An example implementation of a *frontend as a plugin* is the {url_github_lns_dashboard}[LNS UI plugin] for the example application Lisk Name Service.

. Use your favorite framework/ programming language to develop a *standalone user interface*, and communicate to the node via the available <<communication-interfaces-apis>>. 
Please be aware, every node has only a few basic API endpoints as described in the xref:{url_rpc_endpoints}[] page, which might not be ideally suited for more complex UIs. 
In this case, we recommend using the enriched API of Lisk Service as middleware to communicate between the frontend and blockchain application.  

.. One example is the frontend of the {url_github_srs}[SRS example application^], which has been developed with React.js. 
Another example is the UI for the Hello World application, detailed in the guide xref:{url_integrate_ui}[].  

. For later requirements in a production environment, we highly recommend using xref:{url_lisk_service_intro}[Lisk Service], which will aggregate the data from the blockchain network and other 3rd party sources, and will provide an enriched API with a lot more endpoints and query options. 

> With Lisk Service, you can also create a custom service as per your business needs to support various UI projects like mobile and web applications. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With Lisk Service, you can also create a custom service as per your business requirements to support various UI projects, such as mobile and web applications. 
```

:url_lisk_service: {lisk_service}index.adoc
:url_sdk_plugins: {docs_sdk}plugins/index.adoc
:url_fork_choice_rule: understand-blockchain/lisk-protocol/consensus-algorithm.adoc#fork_choice_rules

//External URLs
:url_lisk_roadmap: https://lisk.com/roadmap
:url_github_lns_dashboard: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-examples/tree/nh-lisk-name-service/tutorials/lisk-name-service/lns-dashboard-plugin
:url_github_srs: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-examples/tree/development/tutorials/social-recovery
:url_blog_benchmark: https://lisk.com/blog/development/benchmarking-lisk-core-v3.0.0-against-lisk-core-v2.1.6-0
:url_lisk_apps: https://lisk.com/ecosystem
//Project URLs

In the "Understand Lisk blockchain" category you learn the basic concepts of Lisk blockchain, Network, and Protocol. The page discusses the topics and terms that are important to know when developing within the Lisk ecosystem.

This page gives an overview of what Lisk blockchain is. what are the key elements of a Lisk blockchain? what Lisk Network and Protocol is? what are blockchain applications and a basic structure for blockchain applications?

== What is Lisk Blockchain?

> A blockchain is a chain of interconnected blocks on various nodes distributed across a P2P network.

Reviewer 2: We now have a separate page explaning `what-is-blockchain.adoc` in the intro section.
I think it would be nice to refer to this page at this point

Each node keeps its copy of the blockchain protocol and its related data. It syncs periodically with other nodes to ensure that the nodes' records are up to date.

The Lisk blockchain also follows the same principle.
It is a combination of the main chain and many interconnected side chains.

> Each side chain is registered to the main chain and is specific to a blockchain application.

Reviewer 3: Throughout the docs, we should maintain uniformity with the 'mainchain' and 'sidechain' terms. For the most part, we use mainchain and sidechain and not main chain and side chain, so I would suggest we stick with 'mainchain' and 'sidechain'.

Unlike Ethereum, where dApps have to share the same chain for their blockchain needs, Lisk provides the opportunity for each application to have its side chain.

This enables slower chain growth as information is only received from a single blockchain application.
It also provides faster block generation and lessens the burden on the network.
These side chains can also communicate with other side chains with the help of xref:{lisk_cross_chain_communication}[Lisk Cross Chain Communication].

> Applications built with Lisk blockchains are called "blockchain applications". These applications can have customized logic, UIs, and a blockchain as their application's database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Applications built with Lisk blockchains are called "blockchain applications". **These applications can have customized logic, UIs, and a blockchain as their application's database.
```

Would make that statement bold :)

An overview of Lisk Blockchain can be seen in the following diagram.

> image::understand-blockchain/lisk-blockchain-overview.png["Lisk blockchain overview", 600, align="center"]

Reviewer 2: Some feedback concerning the image:

- I think Commander communicates to the blockchain via RPC as well
- Lisk Core is the blockchain application of the Lisk Mainchain, I would keep the diagram more general, naming the CLI blockchain application CLI (maybe sometimes it makes sense to use an abbreviation like `BApp CLI`, but currently we don't use this short term so we would need to clarify this).
- The CLI doesn't use Commander afaik
- A user can communicate directly with a node via RPC communication, this is not reflected in the diagram.
- The image of the blockchain network looks nice, but can be a little misleading: E.g., what is the difference between the small and big circles of the mainchain? Also, how the nodes are connected does not reflect reality (small circles are always connected to big circles?) maybe i wouldn't even picture the node network here (we also have network topology below, which could be updated to include mainchain and at least 2 sidechains) and just picture the chain of blocks are representation of the mainchain and sidechains.
- Also for clarify, I would include at least 2 different sidechains in the diagram, and color them differently

> xref:{url_lisk_service}[Lisk Service] allows interaction with the blockchain network based on Lisk protocols. Lisk Service acts as a bridge between external software and the Lisk blockchain. We recommend the use of Lisk Service whenever data aggregation or communication to the Lisk network is required.

Reviewer 2: Technically, it doesn't allow it, but it makes it a lot more convenient by aggregating the relevant data for external services, enriching it if needed with off-chain data, and providing additional endpoints to get the data efficiently.

It is also a partial mesh network, which means that every node is only connected to a small subset of nodes in the network.

Unstructured partial mesh networks allow nodes to share information in a very expeditious and secure manner with all other nodes.
They also can scale extremely well, even for large networks with thousands of connected nodes.

=== Lisk Protocol

As mentioned earlier, a blockchain application consists of a network of nodes connected via P2P. Each node has an instance of Lisk Protocol and together, these nodes form a chain. The on-chain logic present in each instance of the Lisk protocol must be the same for a chain. However, the off-chain logic for each node can differ with in a chain.

Each blockchain application has its blockchain known as a side chain. This side chain is registered with the main chain.

A node can only connect to a single network which can either be the main chain or the side chain.

The Lisk Protocol is divided into two layers:

* Application layer
* Engine layer

A detailed picture of the Lisk Protocol is present in the following architecture diagram.

> image:architecture.png[lisk-framework-architecture, 900 , align="center"]

Reviewer 2: The diagram looks really nice!  
Just a few suggestions:

- On the bottom left: Would rename "blockchain" to "node network" or "blockchain network"
- right side: Data store image is not visible in dark mode
- What does the arrow between P2P and chain stand for? Do they have a special connection?
- top left: same remarkd for CLI & Commander as for the above diagram

Once verified, the transactions are added to the block header.
A generator uses the _last generated block_ and _generator keys_ to generate a block.
//For more information about Generator and Block Generation, see <<URL>>

===== Consensus
The consensus domain applies the xref:{url_fork_choice_rule}[fork choice rule] and checks the properties contained in the block header.
It is also responsible for the replication of the same sequence of states among all nodes in the network.
For more information, see xref:{url_consensus}[Consensus].

===== Chain
After a consensus for a block is reached and the state has been changed, the new block's information is passed to the Chain.
The chain stores the transaction data in a data store.

A chain is also responsible for fetching blockchain data from the data stores.

===== P2P
The P2P domain handles sending and receiving data from nodes. 
It also maintains an active connection with the Lisk Network. 
Every node receives new blocks generated by other nodes via the P2P network.
The receiver node in that case repeats all the steps mentioned in the Engine layer. 

> If the received block is verified, the receiving node adds it to their instance of blockchain.

Author: Yes, agreed.

===== Data Stores
Each blockchain node keeps data on various data stores inside its Lisk protocol instance. This data is of two types: on-chain and off-chain.

* *On-chain* data includes but is not limited to state data of the chain, account balance, nonce, multi-signature keys, generators' information, and the Sparse Merkel tree, etc.
The blocks, transactions, events, and assets are also part of the on-chain data among various other properties.

* *Off-chain* data includes but is not limited to node information, peer list, random hash, etc. 
It also contains information for generators i.e. last generated block, encrypted keys, etc.
Lisk also maintains off-chain data about the legacy chains.

> Legacy data consists of blocks from depreciated versions of the protocol.

Author: Ummmm the term depreciate is correct here. Here are the definitions for both

[depreciated](https://www.google.com/search?q=depreciated&rlz=1C5CHFA_enPK1012PK1012&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8)
[deprecated](https://www.google.com/search?q=deprecated&rlz=1C5CHFA_enPK1012PK1012&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8)

> Legacy data consists of blocks from depreciated versions of the protocol.

Reviewer 3: OK 👍

.Examples of blockchain applications
****
Examples of blockchain applications can be found in the tutorials, such as the xref:{url_tutorials_nft}[], or the xref:{url_tutorials_srs}[] application.

Additionally, check out the apps list at the {url_lisk_apps}[Blockchain applications powered by Lisk^] page.
****

==== Structure of blockchain applications

image::intro/ui-diagrams.png[different-structures-of-blockchain-application,700 ,align="center"]

Blockchain applications usually consist of a frontend and a backend, like normal web applications.

In contrast to normal server-client applications, there is not one central backend, but rather a whole network of nodes that together secure and maintain the status of the blockchain.
Each node can handle complex business logic and provides a flexible and customizable API.
The blockchain itself is used as a database layer for the application.

The frontend allows users to interact with the blockchain application.
The implementation of a frontend is flexible.
For example, this can be achieved in the following ways:

> TIP: Although it is possible to build UI through plugins, It is recommended to separate the UI from the backend of the application for scalability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
TIP: Although it is possible to build a UI through plugins, It is recommended to separate the UI from the backend of the application to increase scalability.
```

[loweralpha]

> . Plugins can be used to develop UI for a blockchain application. You can create and register a UI xref:{url_introduction_plugins}[plugin] for your blockchain application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Plugins can be used to develop a UI for a blockchain application. You can create and register a UI xref:{url_introduction_plugins}[plugin] for your blockchain application.
```

An example implementation of a *frontend as a plugin* is the {url_github_lns_dashboard}[LNS UI plugin] for the example application Lisk Name Service.

. Use your favorite framework/ programming language to develop a *standalone user interface*, and communicate to the node via the available <<communication-interfaces-apis>>.
One example is the frontend of the {url_github_srs}[SRS example application^], which has been developed with React.js.
Another example is the UI for the Hello World application, detailed in the guide xref:{url_integrate_ui}[].

. For later requirements in a production environment, a *middleware* similar to xref:{url_lisk_service_intro}[Lisk Service] should be used, which will aggregate the data from the blockchain network and other 3rd party sources as well.
With middleware, you can also create a custom service as per your business needs to support various UI projects like mobile and web applications.

> The frontend can then request this data via API requests from the middleware.

Reviewer 2: In v5, Lisk Service was only working for Lisk Core, this is why I wrote this section in more general terms, saying "Something _like_ Lisk service" - but with SDK v6, Service will become blockchain agnostic, so it will work for every other blockchain application, and can be customized further by the user. This is why this section should be updated to clearly mention and recommend Lisk Service as data aggregation service of choice (ofc they can still implement their own service if there is the need to)

Blockchain applications on the contrary rely on their blockchain, and therefore also need to take care of maintaining their network.
In the beginning, this will make the launch of the application slightly more complex, however, having an independent network comes with numerous benefits which are covered in the following paragraphs.

The Lisk documentation refers to applications built with the Lisk protocol as "blockchain applications" and not "dApps". To clarify the difference, blockchain applications do not share a common blockchain, but instead, each runs on its chain.
As a result blockchain applications have the following advantages:

* Lower transaction fees, as the high traffic of one blockchain application, does not affect other blockchain applications.

* The blockchain for the application can be designed with the optimal characteristics for the specific use case, (for example by adjusting the block time or the number of generators or even changing the whole consensus algorithm).

* A much more scalable blockchain, as it only handles the data from one blockchain application.

> Thus it is growing much slower in size and doesn't suffer so much from potential bottlenecks in the network, which can happen during times of high workload on many different dApps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Hence it is growing much slower in size and doesn't suffer as much from potential bottlenecks in the network, which can happen during times of high workload on many different dApps.
```

> * Interoperability is another perk of Lisk. Various side chains registered to the main chain can communicate with each other and exchange value through the main chain.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Interoperability is a key beneficial advantage of Lisk. Various sidechains registered to the mainchain can efficiently and securely communicate with each other and exchange data through the mainchain.  
```

A detailed account of Lisk interoperability features is discussed in the xref:{lisk_cross_chain_communication}[Lisk Cross Chain Communication] page.

> In the "Understand blockchain" category you learn the basic concepts of blockchain applications, including how they are structured and which topics and terms are important to know when developing within the Lisk ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: Where did all this content go, is it moved somewhere else? I cannot see it included in this PR. The content is still valid and shouldn't get lost.

Also the 3 domains of blockchain section is something that would fit nicely in the beginning of this page imho.

Author: Ummmmm, I have kept a copy of both the files from my development branch locally.

Reviewer 3: Agreed 👍
